---
title: 'Intellectual History of Fine-Insured Bounties' 
series: 'Side Topics' 
draft: false
---

# Fine-Insured Bounties: An Intellectual History (1950–Present)

## Early Foundations: Deterrence Theory and Optimal Punishment (1950s–1970s)

The modern economic analysis of crime began in the 1960s with Gary Becker’s
seminal work *“Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach” (1968)*
([source](https://archiv.soms.ethz.ch/sociology_course/Lecture6/becker1968.pdf)).
Becker modeled criminals as rational actors who respond to incentives, laying
out how the probability of apprehension and the severity of punishment interact
to deter offenses. Crucially, Becker highlighted the efficiency of monetary
fines as a form of punishment. He noted that fines are essentially transfer
payments (costs to offenders but benefits to others) and thus have near-zero net
social cost, unlike imprisonment which consumes resources in prisons, guards,
and administration.

Becker even suggested using **fines whenever feasible**—for example, via
installment payments—to replace costlier punishments
([Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach - JSTOR](https://www.jstor.org/stable/1830482)).
This created a foundation for later ideas: if criminals could be made to pay
sufficiently large fines, society could deter crime without resorting to
expensive incarceration. The fine-insured bounty (FIB) concept builds directly
on this insight by proposing a system where all punishments are fines backed by
insurance.

Building on Becker’s ideas, economists in the 1970s explored incentive
structures for law enforcement. **Gary Becker and George Stigler (1974)**
proposed an early market-based enforcement idea: pay law enforcers with the
fines they collect
([Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and Compensation of Enforcers](https://econpapers.repec.org/article/ucpjlstud/v_3a3_3ay_3a1974_3ai_3a1_3ap_3a1-18.htm)).
In *“Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and Compensation of Enforcers,”* they argued
that giving police and inspectors a stake in fines (essentially a bounty) would
align their incentives and reduce corruption—since an enforcer who keeps fines
would not accept a bribe lower than the fine.

This foreshadows the FIB system’s use of bounties to motivate enforcers. Around
the same time, **William Landes and Richard Posner (1975)** examined the concept
of *“The Private Enforcement of Law.”* They pointed out that private parties
could, in theory, enforce laws for profit, and discussed blackmail as an
“unconventional example” of private law enforcement
([The Private Enforcement of Law - JSTOR](https://www.jstor.org/stable/724100)).

In the case of **blackmail**, a person discovers someone’s wrongdoing and
induces the wrongdoer to pay to avoid official punishment—effectively a
*negative* bounty system. Landes and Posner noted that a blackmailer can extract
up to the amount the offender would pay to avoid legal sanctions. Their analysis
highlighted both the potential and pitfalls of privatized enforcement: while it
creates incentives to detect crime, it can lead to socially costly outcomes
(where the blackmailer profits but the wrongdoer avoids formal punishment).

Their work is an early theoretical exploration of the very mechanism Hanson’s
FIB system later tries to harness: **bounty hunting** within a legal, regulated
framework that avoids the downsides of illicit blackmail.

## Libertarian Visions of Privatized Enforcement (1970s–1980s)

Outside academia, libertarian scholars and economists in the 1970s developed
bold proposals for **fully privatizing law enforcement**, many of which
anticipated elements of the FIB model.

Philosopher **Robert Nozick’s** *“Anarchy, State, and Utopia” (1974)*
hypothesized a society without a state, where protection agencies compete to
provide security and enforcement. Nozick argued such agencies would eventually
form a minimal state, but his work introduced a broad audience to the idea of
**competing private enforcers** and raised questions about how they could be
regulated or constrained.

Around the same time, libertarian economist **Murray Rothbard** described how
private insurance-based enforcement might work. In *“Society Without a State”
(1975)*, Rothbard envisioned that individuals would buy *crime insurance* from
companies, and those insurers would then **pursue criminals to recoup losses**
([Society Without a State - Mises Institute](https://mises.org/mises-daily/society-without-state)).

If a client was victimized, the insurer would compensate the victim and then
**hunt down the aggressor to recover the payout**, effectively operating as a
private police force. Rothbard noted a “natural market connection between
insurance companies and defense service, since they need pay out less in claims
the more effectively they can reduce the rate of crime.” This model contains the
seeds of FIB: it pairs **insurance with enforcement** incentives, though in
Rothbard’s version the insurance is for victims rather than perpetrators.

Economist **David D. Friedman** extended these ideas in *“The Machinery of
Freedom” (1973)*. Friedman described a scenario in which government police are
replaced by private protection agencies selling security services. Notably, he
suggested these agencies might **guarantee outcomes by insuring their clients
against losses from crime**
([The Machinery of Freedom - Slate Star Codex Review](https://slatestarcodex.com/2015/03/18/book-review-the-machinery-of-freedom/)).

In Friedman’s hypothetical, if a theft occurs, the victim’s agency pays for the
loss and then strives to catch the thief, potentially reclaiming the stolen
goods or exacting compensation. He wrote that agencies could either focus on
preventive measures or “take no preventive action at all, but make great efforts
to hunt down criminals guilty of crimes against their clients,” effectively
pursuing offenders after the fact. This approach—insurers funding enforcement
efforts to avoid paying claims—is closely aligned with the FIB framework, except
that FIB flips the script: instead of insuring victims, it **insures potential
offenders** so that any harm they cause (fines) will be paid for sure.

Both visions marry the idea of insurance with bounties for catching wrongdoers,
creating a market-driven enforcement mechanism.

Libertarian legal theorists also advocated turning crime into a matter of
restitution rather than punishment, an idea complementary to FIBs. **Randy
Barnett**, in the late 1970s (e.g., *“Restitution: A New Paradigm of Criminal
Justice,” 1977*), argued that the criminal justice system should focus on making
offenders compensate victims, rather than imposing harm for harm’s sake.

In this paradigm, **crimes are treated like torts**—the offender owes a debt to
the victim. While Barnett’s vision still left enforcement to victims or the
state, it reinforced the notion that **monetary sanctions** can replace prison
for most crimes. If offenders must pay for the damage they cause, a natural
question arises: how do we ensure they pay in full?

One solution: require offenders to have the means (through bonds or insurance)
to pay restitution—directly anticipating the *insurance requirement* later
embedded in Hanson’s FIB proposal.

## Law & Economics Refines Enforcement Incentives (1980s)

Through the 1980s, scholars of law and economics further developed the
theoretical underpinnings of optimal enforcement, setting the stage for a
fine-insured bounty system.

**A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell** produced a series of influential
papers on public law enforcement. One key result (Polinsky & Shavell, 1984) was
that **fines and imprisonment should be used in combination such that fines are
exhausted first**. In other words, the government should “use the fine to its
maximum feasible extent before possibly supplementing it with an imprisonment
term”
([The Optimal Use of Fines and Imprisonment - NBER](https://www.nber.org/papers/w0932)).

This principle echoes Becker’s earlier point—since fines are cheap transfers, an
optimal system would rely on fines as much as possible, resorting to costly
incarceration only when fines cannot deter (for example, when offenders are
judgment-proof or when fines must be capped below the harm caused).

Shavell also examined scenarios where monetary penalties alone may not suffice.
In a 1985 paper on criminal sanctions, he analyzed when non-monetary punishments
(like prison) are needed—typically when offenders lack enough assets to pay a
deterrent fine or when monetary penalties can’t fully internalize the harm.

______________________________________________________________________

The **“judgment-proof problem”** became a focal point in this literature. It
refers to offenders (or injurers) who do not have sufficient wealth to pay for
the harms they cause, undermining the deterrent effect of fines or liability.

In 1986, **Steven Shavell** explicitly addressed this in *“The Judgment Proof
Problem”*. He noted that individuals can cause harm exceeding their assets and
insurance coverage
([The Judgment Proof Problem - SpringerLink](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-94-015-7957-5_17)).

To mitigate this, Shavell discussed policy solutions:

- Imposing **minimum asset or insurance requirements** on those who might cause
  harm.
- Using **criminal sanctions** (like imprisonment) as a backstop for those
  unable to pay fines.

The idea of mandatory liability insurance—commonplace today in auto law—directly
informs Hanson’s later proposal to require everyone to carry **crime liability
insurance**.

By the late 1980s, the intellectual pieces were largely in place: scholars
understood that **high fines are economically efficient**, that **private
incentives can be leveraged for enforcement**, and that **unlimited fines
require either sufficient offender wealth or mandatory insurance** to back them.
What remained was to combine these insights into a coherent system.

______________________________________________________________________

Empirical and historical studies during the 1980s also strengthened the case for
privatized enforcement models.

Economist **Bruce L. Benson’s** research (later synthesized in \*“The Enterprise
of Law,” 1990) chronicled how legal systems functioned with minimal state
involvement. He examined medieval and early modern societies—such as Anglo-Saxon
England and the American frontier—where law enforcement was largely private or
community-based.

In the Anglo-Saxon system, for example, crimes were typically resolved by the
payment of **weregild** (man-price) to victims or their kin, and enforcement of
these fines was a private affair backed by the threat of outlawry.

This historical precedent shows a working model of **decentralized, fine-based
justice**—essentially an early form of “fine-insured” justice, where a person’s
kinship group acted as a guarantee for payment.

Benson and others illustrated that even complex societies could rely on
**decentralized enforcement mechanisms with strong incentives** (bounties,
mutual aid pacts, reputation systems) rather than a monopolistic state-run
police force.

These findings gave modern reformers confidence that alternatives to state-run
policing were not only theoretical curiosities but had real historical
analogues.

## Toward Fine-Insured Bounties: Contemporary Proposals and Hanson's Synthesis (1990s–2010s)

By the 1990s and 2000s, the stage was set for proposals combining **monetary
sanctions, insurance, and bounty incentives**. Several scholars and commentators
began explicitly suggesting more market-based approaches to criminal justice.

For example, legal theorists noted the success of **qui tam** statutes and
whistleblower bounties in areas like fraud enforcement—essentially paying
private parties a portion of fines for uncovering wrongdoing. Think tanks like
the U.S. NCPA and economists such as **Morgan O. Reynolds** advocated expanding
the private sector’s role in law enforcement, from private police patrols to
bounty programs for certain crimes. These incremental steps pointed toward
leveraging financial incentives and insurance mechanisms to improve deterrence
and reduce public costs.

______________________________________________________________________

The culmination of these threads came with **Robin Hanson’s fine-insured bounty
(FIB) model**, first introduced on his blog in January 2018.

In *“Privately Enforced & Punished Crime,”* Hanson outlines a radical but
carefully reasoned proposal to *“privatize the detection, prosecution, and
punishment of crime”*
([Privately Enforced & Punished Crime - Overcoming Bias](https://www.overcomingbias.com/2018/01/privately-enforced-punished-crime.html)).

He explicitly acknowledges the idea is not wholly original—“many similar changes
have been proposed before,” he writes—even if proper credit had yet to be sorted
out. Hanson’s contribution was to integrate these insights into one
comprehensive **“package” of legal reforms**, and to articulate how the system
could work in practice.

The core of Hanson’s FIB system can be summarized as follows:

> **“All (but one) crime is punished officially by fines, everyone is fully
> insured to pay large fines, and bounty hunters detect and prosecute each
> crime.”**\
> ([Bounty Hunter Blackmail - Overcoming Bias](https://www.overcomingbias.com/p/bounty-hunter-blackmailhtml))

In this system:

- The government’s role is to set fine schedules and adjudicate guilt.
- Investigation, prosecution, and punishment (via fines) are privatized through
  **competitive bounty hunters**.
- Liability insurers guarantee that fines are actually paid.

______________________________________________________________________

### Core Mechanisms of Hanson's Proposal

- **Mandatory Crime Insurance:**\
  Every individual must carry insurance or a bond capable of covering very large
  fines—analogous to mandatory auto liability insurance
  ([source](https://www.overcomingbias.com/2018/01/privately-enforced-punished-crime.html)).

  - This solves the **judgment-proof problem**: no criminal can escape liability
    by claiming insolvency.
  - Failure to carry insurance becomes the only criminal offense still
    punishable by traditional means (e.g., prison).

- **Cash Fines for (Almost) Everything:**\
  With insurance in place, **monetary fines replace prison terms** as the
  default punishment.

  - Fines are calibrated to reflect the total social harm of the
    offense—sometimes even inflated to account for detection probabilities and
    bounty costs.
  - This preserves deterrence while avoiding the immense costs of incarceration.

- **Bounty Hunter Enforcement:**\
  Private parties can act as **bounty hunters**, investigating crimes and
  bringing evidence to court.

  - Upon conviction, bounty hunters collect a predefined **bounty**, smaller
    than the fine.
  - **Anyone**—including rival bounty hunters—can report wrongdoing, preventing
    insider corruption (e.g., the “blue wall of silence”).

______________________________________________________________________

Hanson’s model carefully addresses key vulnerabilities:

- **Bounty hunters are liable for harms** they cause during investigations,
  incentivizing caution.
- **Blackmail concerns**—private settlements instead of formal prosecution—are
  countered by competition. If one bounty hunter tries to strike a deal, another
  has incentive to expose both parties.

______________________________________________________________________

Hanson explicitly ties his proposal back to earlier thinkers:

- The efficiency of fines over imprisonment (Becker).
- The necessity of insurance to guarantee fine collection (Shavell).
- The power of market competition to improve over monopolistic enforcement
  (Benson, Friedman).

In his follow-up essay *“Bounty Hunter Blackmail”*
([source](https://www.overcomingbias.com/p/bounty-hunter-blackmailhtml)), Hanson
directly engages critiques like those of Landes and Posner, analyzing the
stability of blackmail schemes and proposing structural safeguards to protect
the integrity of the bounty system.

______________________________________________________________________

**In short:**\
Robin Hanson’s Fine-Insured Bounty system synthesizes decades of
law-and-economics theory into a coherent, practical proposal for reengineering
criminal justice around **market incentives**, **private insurance**, and
**competitive enforcement**.

## Extensions and Ongoing Discourse (2018–2025)

Since Hanson’s articulation of fine-insured bounties, the concept has sparked
discussion in academic blogs and futurist circles, often in connection with
pressing problems that might require **strong deterrence**.

For example, some commentators have suggested FIB-like systems for deterring
dangerous technological developments. In 2023, an essay on LessWrong by
*“Virtual Instinct”* proposed **fine-insured bounties to prevent dangerous AI
research**
([Fine-Insured Bounties as AI Deterrent — LessWrong](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/AAueKp9TcBBhRYe3K/fine-insured-bounties-as-ai-deterrent)).

The idea was to heavily fine anyone pushing forward AI capabilities and reward
whistleblowers—a direct application of Hanson’s crime insurance and bounty model
to a non-traditional “crime.”\
The post explains that even a **moderate fine**, if coupled with the **risk of
being reported by a colleague**, could create a strong chilling effect on
undesired research
([source](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/AAueKp9TcBBhRYe3K/fine-insured-bounties-as-ai-deterrent)).

This shows the **versatility** of the FIB framework:\
It can be seen not only as criminal justice reform but as a **general
mechanism** to enforce any regulation or moratorium by decentralizing
enforcement.

Influential bloggers like **Scott Alexander** (Astral Codex Ten) have also
discussed Hanson’s FIB idea in the context of AI policy.\
While acknowledging the **theoretical neatness** of FIBs, they note the
**political and ethical challenges**—for instance, the risk that **universal
surveillance and informants-for-profit** could be dystopian if misapplied.\
Nonetheless, the fact that FIBs are being debated in these contexts demonstrates
their impact as a **provocative frontier** of law and economics.

______________________________________________________________________

In academia, the fine-insured bounty concept remains young but is beginning to
build on a lineage of scholarship that will likely examine its efficacy over
time.

Researchers in law and economics continue exploring **hybrids of public and
private enforcement**:

- **Rewarding private parties** for enforcement actions.
- **Using insurance markets** to regulate risk-taking behavior.

Hanson’s FIB can be seen as a **synthesis** of these approaches:

- It creates a **self-regulating system** where insurers, offenders, and bounty
  hunters have balanced incentives.
- Insurers would charge **high-risk clients** higher premiums (similar to how
  auto insurers treat reckless drivers)
  ([source](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/AAueKp9TcBBhRYe3K/fine-insured-bounties-as-ai-deterrent)).
- High premiums discourage risky criminal behavior—or motivate preventive
  measures.

Bounty hunters, driven by profit, serve as an **army of decentralized
detectives**.\
The state, rather than micromanaging law enforcement, focuses primarily on
**setting the right price** (fine) for each offense to reflect its **true social
cost** ([source](https://www.overcomingbias.com/p/bounty-hunter-blackmailhtml)).

This **transforms law enforcement** into something akin to a market for
contraband:\
Just as piracy at sea was eventually squeezed out through strategic price
incentives, so too might crime become **unprofitable** under a well-calibrated
FIB regime.

## Conclusion

The evolution of the fine-insured bounty idea from 1950 onward is a rich
interplay of economics, law, and libertarian philosophy.

Starting with Becker’s insight that **proper pricing of crime via fines** can
achieve deterrence efficiently
([source](https://archiv.soms.ethz.ch/sociology_course/Lecture6/becker1968.pdf)),
the field advanced through decades of analysis about how to align enforcers’
incentives and ensure wrongdoers pay for harm.

Key contributions along the way:

- **Becker and Stigler** showed that enforcers could be **paid for performance**
  via fines.
- **Landes and Posner** illuminated the dual nature of private enforcement
  (bounty vs. blackmail)
  ([The Private Enforcement of Law - JSTOR](https://www.jstor.org/stable/724100)).
- **Nozick, Rothbard, and Friedman** imagined entire legal systems run as
  competitive markets
  ([The Machinery of Freedom - Slate Star Codex Review](https://slatestarcodex.com/2015/03/18/book-review-the-machinery-of-freedom/)).
- **Polinsky and Shavell** formalized why to prefer fines first and how to deal
  with offenders' wealth limits
  ([The Optimal Use of Fines and Imprisonment - NBER](https://www.nber.org/papers/w0932)).
- **Shavell** proposed **mandatory insurance** to solve the judgment-proof
  problem
  ([The Judgment-Proof Society - bepress](https://law.bepress.com/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=&httpsredir=1&article=3923&context=expresso)).

Robin Hanson’s fine-insured bounty system ties these threads together into a
bold proposal:\
A world where **crime doesn’t pay because every criminal has, in effect, posted
a bond against their future behavior**, and where law enforcement is
**crowdsourced** to anyone eager to earn a bounty.

______________________________________________________________________

This narrated bibliography has traced the major works and ideas leading up to
FIB—and those expanding on it.

As Hanson himself humbly noted, many pieces of FIB were “proposed before” by
others
([Privately Enforced & Punished Crime - Hanson](https://www.overcomingbias.com/2018/01/privately-enforced-punished-crime.html));
his contribution was to **assemble them into a cohesive system**.

Going forward, the FIB model invites further interdisciplinary exploration.
Scholars will continue examining:

- Potential pitfalls (e.g., collusion, equity and fairness concerns, the role of
  judges to prevent abuse)
  ([Privately Enforced & Punished Crime - Hanson](https://www.overcomingbias.com/2018/01/privately-enforced-punished-crime.html)).
- Real-world analogues, such as private bail enforcement, corporate compliance
  monitors, and whistleblower reward programs.

______________________________________________________________________

Whether or not any jurisdiction ever fully **privatizes criminal justice** as
Hanson imagines, the concept of fine-insured bounties stands as a **culmination
of decades of thought** about how we deter and deal with crime.

It challenges us to reconsider the basic structures of law enforcement in light
of economic incentives—asking, in effect:

> **What if justice were delivered as a competitive service, backed by insurance
> and driven by profit, rather than a monopolistic public good?**

The answers to that question, sketched by the works in this bibliography, mark a
fascinating intellectual journey—from **Bentham’s era** to the present day of
**Hanson’s Futurist jurisprudence**.

## Sources

- Becker, Gary S. 1968. *Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach.* Journal of
  Political Economy 76(2): 169–217.
  [Available online](https://archiv.soms.ethz.ch/sociology_course/Lecture6/becker1968.pdf).

- Becker, Gary S., and George J. Stigler. 1974. *Law Enforcement, Malfeasance,
  and Compensation of Enforcers.* Journal of Legal Studies 3(1): 1–18.
  [Available online](https://econpapers.repec.org/article/ucpjlstud/v_3a3_3ay_3a1974_3ai_3a1_3ap_3a1-18.htm).

- Landes, William M., and Richard A. Posner. 1975. *The Private Enforcement of
  Law.* Journal of Legal Studies 4(1): 1–46.
  [Available online](https://www.jstor.org/stable/724100).

- Nozick, Robert. 1974. *Anarchy, State, and Utopia.* New York: Basic Books.

- Rothbard, Murray N. 1975. *Society Without a State.* Paper presented at the
  American Society for Political and Legal Philosophy.
  [Available online](https://mises.org/mises-daily/society-without-state).

- Friedman, David D. 1973. *The Machinery of Freedom: Guide to a Radical
  Capitalism.* La Salle, IL: Open Court.
  [Review summary](https://slatestarcodex.com/2015/03/18/book-review-the-machinery-of-freedom/).

- Barnett, Randy E. 1977. *Restitution: A New Paradigm of Criminal Justice.*
  Ethics 87(4): 279–301.

- Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and Steven Shavell. 1984. *The Optimal Use of Fines and
  Imprisonment.* Journal of Public Economics 24(1): 89–99.
  [Available online](https://www.nber.org/papers/w0932).

- Shavell, Steven. 1986. *The Judgment Proof Problem.* International Review of
  Law and Economics 6: 45–58.
  [Available online](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-94-015-7957-5_17)
  and
  [Alternative PDF](https://law.bepress.com/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=&httpsredir=1&article=3923&context=expresso).

- Benson, Bruce L. 1990. *The Enterprise of Law: Justice Without the State.* San
  Francisco: Pacific Research Institute.

- Hanson, Robin. 2018. *Privately Enforced & Punished Crime.* Overcoming Bias
  blog, January 15, 2018.
  [Available online](https://www.overcomingbias.com/2018/01/privately-enforced-punished-crime.html).

- Hanson, Robin. 2019. *Bounty Hunter Blackmail.* Overcoming Bias blog, May 3,
  2019\.
  [Available online](https://www.overcomingbias.com/p/bounty-hunter-blackmailhtml).

- Virtual Instinct. 2023. *Fine-Insured Bounties as AI Deterrent.* LessWrong
  blog, April 2, 2023.
  [Available online](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/AAueKp9TcBBhRYe3K/fine-insured-bounties-as-ai-deterrent).

- Quinn, Andrew. 2022. *AI Bounties Revisited.* Personal blog.
  [Available online](https://andrew-quinn.me/ai-bounties/).
