---
title: 'What About Turning Yourself In?' 
series: 'Side Topics' 
draft: false
---

In a Fine-Insured Bounty (FIB) system, criminals fund the very bounties that
catch them. But what if someone decides to game the system—by turning themselves
in?

On the surface, it might seem absurd. Why confess your own crime just to claim
your own bounty? But in certain situations, this seemingly strange strategy
actually makes perfect sense — *once*.

### Scenario 1: The Inevitable Bust

Suppose you've committed an offense—say, you've been quietly running banned AI
experiments—but now realize you're about to get caught. Evidence is leaking,
teammates are acting suspiciously, and you can feel the ~~vultures~~ bounty
hunters triangulating your position as we speak.

In this situation, turning yourself in first is surprisingly rational:

- **You collect your own bounty:** The fine you pay goes right back into your
  pocket, minus administrative fees. Essentially, you minimize your financial
  loss.
- **Reduced penalties:** Confessing to your own crime generally means you can
  provide the highest-quality evidence with the least hassle. Being proactive
  like this could earn leniency from authorities compared to someone caught by
  surprise.
- **Public relations control:** Self-reporting lets you frame the narrative,
  showing contrition rather than being publicly exposed as deceptive.

The major downside? You now have an **official record of wrongdoing**. If you
self-confessed to [littering](/main-sequence/01-the-hook/), prepare for your
insurance premiums to spike. If you self-confessed to something more serious,
like an actual extinction risk, prepare at the very least to never work in
anything remotely close to that industry again — your mere presence would cause
the company to suffer its own unacceptable insurance spike. Who needs precogs
when past behavior is the best predictor of future behavior?

### Scenario 2: The Mole

A much more cunning scenario involves someone *deliberately* infiltrating a
criminal enterprise or dangerous project from the beginning, quietly amassing
trust, insight, and evidence, and planning all along to blow the whistle.

Why might someone do this?

- **Massive payout:** If you've positioned yourself at the core, you'll secure
  substantial rewards for exposing a large-scale violation. A payout of just
  $1,000 per person can make you a millionaire if you're in a thousand-person
  organization.
- **Self-bounty advantage:** When you report the crime, your share of fines—paid
  by your conspirators—can vastly exceed your own losses (especially if you
  structured your involvement carefully).
- **Legal immunity and hero status:** Authorities greatly favor cooperative
  whistleblowers, granting lower administrative fees and leading to speedier
  trials after all.

But, again, the drawback is significant: **the stigma of having been involved at
all**. Insurers, employers, and bounty hunters now have your name flagged,
making future activities subject to intense scrutiny. No matter how loudly you
proclaim yourself to be a cunning mole who planned it from the start, it's very
hard to distinguish between a mole and an opportunist. Better aim big — you
probably only have one shot!

### Society Benefits from a Fast Crime-Justice Feedback Loop

It's worth pointing out that the crimes we are interested in are fundamentally
social harms, and that *staying undetected* is itself an additional social harm.
Think, for example, of the families of loved ones who disappear mysteriously—all
of the years, or decades, of agony about wondering whether they're still out
there, living under a different life, or whether the worst befell them—that's a
harm too, and a heavy one.

This isn't a perspective that we feel is particularly vital to the kinds of
crimes Extinction Bounties focuses on, but it is a real and valid one. We as
innocent bystanders may often find ourselves preferring systems where criminals
of certain stripes elect to turn themselves in as soon as possible, particularly
when the crime is of a more abstract nature.

### Conclusion: High-Risk, High-Reward

Turning yourself in under a FIB regime isn't always foolish—or always brilliant.
It's an extreme strategy suited for cases where capture is either inevitable, or
where infiltrating and exposing criminal operations promises massive personal
upside.

Used wisely, it's a uniquely powerful tool. Misused, it could permanently damage
your professional standing. Either way, the very existence of this option
highlights just how intricately balanced the incentives within a Fine-Insured
Bounty system truly are.
