---
title: '03. The Goal - Making Frontier AI Devs Think Twice' 
weight: 3 
draft: false
---

**Why AI Developers Would Think Twice**

Right now, building cutting-edge artificial intelligence feels like a
high-stakes race. Labs and companies are under enormous pressure to innovate
fast, publish breakthroughs, and capture market share—even at the risk of
dangerous outcomes. But imagine if the rules suddenly changed. Imagine if even
trying to develop an unsafe AI could personally bankrupt you.

That's precisely the promise of the kind of Fine-Insured Bounty (FIB) system we
are proposing here at Extinction Bounties. Here's how:

### 1. "Pause or Perish"

Suppose we established an FIB that any development of unsafe or prohibited AI
technology incurs massive fines. (The exact details of how this is determined
can, and probably should, be left a little fuzzy: Generally, currently-existing
AI models appear to be fine, as would be wrappers or even multi-agent workflows
based around them. But training an even more powerful fundamental model is
probably fine-worthy. Etc.) These fines aren't just symbolic—they're calibrated
to match the potential societal harm of a rogue or catastrophic AI. When it
comes to the probable end of the human race if we screw up, a fine equal to all
of the money in the world might feel downright lenient.

Whoever exposes the violation first claims the entire bounty from the fines
paid. This transforms the risk calculus dramatically. Instead of "publish or
perish," software developers everywhere now face "pause or perish."

The message becomes clear: reckless development isn't brave or ambitious—it's
financial suicide.

### 2. No One to Trust

With large bounties at stake, AI labs become environments of extreme scrutiny
and suspicion. Can you trust your co-worker, your intern, your boss? Anyone
could secretly document wrongdoing and report the lab to collect a life-changing
reward for not just them, but everyone they know.

Your own insurers monitoring your compliance have very good incentives to keep
you honest—they pay the fines if you slip up. They will *demand* to audit you
heavily if you do anything within orbit of AI, or you can kiss your premium
rates goodbye. And from whom the insurers pull away, to whom the bounty hunters
come to play.

Suddenly, secrecy becomes incredibly costly and difficult to maintain.
Transparency and cautious compliance are now inarguably the safest, most prudent
paths forward.

### 3. Insurance as the New Regulator

Every AI lab which doesn't want to end up with their entire staff imprisoned for
life must carry insurance against potential FIB fines, lest they get caught.
Insurers aren't passive—they're motivated to avoid payouts at all costs. They’ll
audit AI labs closely, enforce strict safety measures, and rapidly raise
premiums if they suspect risky behavior.

This creates a powerful, dynamic, and responsive private regulation layer:
insurers effectively police their clients, ensuring safe practices aren't just
recommended—they're financially mandatory. You can bet the insurers will be
reacting to the dizzying rate of new tech news as fast or faster than you,
whatever that rate ends up being.

### 4. Internalizing Catastrophic Risk

Current-day AI developers rarely bear the full societal costs of dangerous
mistakes. A misaligned superintelligent AI would devastate humanity—but plenty
of its would-be creators might be willing to gamble on this, or even see it as
the morally imperative option (I'm serious!).

FIBs change that. By matching fines to expected harms, developers internalize
the risks they impose on society. Now, taking safety shortcuts no longer saves
money or accelerates careers—it destroys them.

### Conclusion: A Culture of Safety

Fine-Insured Bounties don't just punish wrongdoing—they transform incentives
completely. In a FIB world, AI developers would think twice, three times, and
then pause altogether before engaging in unsafe practices.

The result? A culture shift toward prudence, transparency, and
responsibility—exactly what we need as AI capabilities advance at an
unprecedented pace.

Next let's talk about the international context, secretly the hardest part:
[Making It Global - Treaties, Coalitions, Extraditions](/main-sequence/04-making-it-global/).
